# Data-Analytics-of-Video-Popularity
Ziyu He (zh2255) Haoxiang Gao (hg2412)

Predictions and analysis on popularity of user-created web content, especially video, is becoming increasingly important and valuable to gain insights in web content’s dissemination in a dynamic distribution system, to benefit decision making in online marketing and designing of web content. In this paper, we aim to conduct a comprehensive data-driven study of influential factors of YouTube channels’ popularity. Analysis in this paper is achieved with the following steps: (1) Collecting related information from various sources in regard to each individual YouTube channel; (2) Data preprocessing algorithms to extract useful features from unstructured raw data; (3) Training and validating machine learning models for prediction of quantified channel popularity and inference of relative importance of predictive features; (4) Developing an item based recommender based on previous analysis and its online visualization. With data of more than 10,000 YouTube channels and 80,000 YouTube videos, our analysis shows that popularity of current YouTube channels can be quantified as 3 clusters with different levels of accumulated views; frequency of publishing videos, interaction of content creator and reference of its videos on online social media are critical factors to promote popularity of a YouTube channel. 

The first part of our code are the data collection library and scripts, which provides an easier-to-use API suited for big data analytics applications. We also contributed an API that can crawl Wikipedia topics from Wikipedia Portal pages. The video data collection functions take topic words as input and download massive video data related to these topics as JSON files which is the friendliest to document-based database, like MongoDB and DynamoDB. To reduce the latency caused by HTTP request to YouTube API, we wrote multi-threading functions that can speed up the data collection by 10 times. The function that merge separate dataset make it easier to deploy distributed systems such as Amazon EC2. 

The second part of our code is data prepossessing and model training and predictions. We wrote script to get Twitter Reference data and applied NLTK sentiment analysis, PCA analyis, LDA topic modeling, and Random Forest model. For detailed documentation, please read "data processing_model/readme.txt"

The final part of our code is a Python server which support a website for visualization and recommendation. Video channel data visualization built as an interactive web application. We implemented the visualization functionality using D3 Javascript Library and Boostrap at the front end and Python Flask and MongoDB at back end. D3 Javascript can immediately react to user’s mouse activities, and send request to our back-end server, and the server retrieves the documents stored in MongoDB and send the JSON data back to browser at client side. Upon data being loaded, Javascript will update the tables and charts that are viewed by users. Each video channel is represented as a bubble on the bubble chart and it is easy to characterize the popularity of different video channels. By clicking on the bubble, the website can dynamically show the statistics and contents of each video channel, which is highly user friendly. User can explore more features of each channel that are not available on YouTube. 

We also built a recommendation system based on users’ preferences and similarity of video channels’ features. Such similarity is measured on features obtained from our previous analysis which means our recommender incorporates novel factors such as YouTube channels’ interaction on social media, named entity recognition, etc. The user is required to input their favorite five video channels in descending order. The first channel represents the video channel that the user likes most. We assigned these 5 channels different weight, say, weight = [5,4,3,2,1]. Then we calculate each video channel’s distances to these 5 videos picked by user and compute the weighted average of these distances. The videos with least weighted distances are recommended to users. The main functionality of recommendation system is implemented in Python Flask backend, which responds recommended channels’ JSON data to the front end’s request.
